The discography of American pop singer Kesha consists of two studio albums, one compilation album, two extended plays, thirteen singles (including four as a featured artist), three promotional singles and nine other appearances. As of May 2014, Kesha has sold approximately 4 million albums and 59 million records worldwide.
Kesha made her international debut in early 2009 featuring on the Flo Rida single, "Right Round", which reached number one in the United States on the "Billboard Hot 100". Kesha's debut album, "Animal", released January 2010, topped the Canadian and American charts, debuting at number one in its first week on the "Billboard 200". The album's lead single, and Kesha's solo debut single, "Tik Tok", was released in August 2009 and reached number one in eleven countries and spent nine consecutive weeks on top of the "Billboard Hot 100". Since its release in 2009, the song has sold 14 million copies worldwide and has received multi-platinum certifications in sixteen countries. The album continued on to spawn three more hit singles which include "Blah Blah Blah", "Your Love Is My Drug" and "Take It Off". As of May 2012, "Animal" has sold a total of 3 million units worldwide and 1.4 million units in the United States.
The commercial and critical success of her first album led to plans of a deluxe edition of the album titled "Cannibal", which was ultimately released as a stand alone extended play in November 2010. Its lead single, "We R Who We R", reached the top ten in ten countries, while peaking at number one in the United States, Australia and the United Kingdom. The EP's second and final single, "Blow", was released in February 2011 and also managed to peak inside the top ten of multiple countries.
Kesha released her second studio album, "Warrior", in December 2012. The lead single, "Die Young", peaked at number two in the United States, while charting in the top ten of eleven other countries. Two more singles, "C'Mon and "Crazy Kids", were also released from the album, but failed to match the success of the lead single. In October 2013, she was featured on Pitbull's single, "Timber", which has reached the top five of multiple countries, while peaking at number one in the United Kingdom, Canada and the United States.